06-23-93
The Organism class hierarchy was originally designed to gain experience
designing class hierarchies and also as a translation of an earlier
Modula-2 program, AUTOMATA.  The design goals of the Organism class hierarchy
are:

    1) Provide an extensible class hierarchy for exploring systems with
       complex parameterizations.
    2) Define a system both genotypically and phenotypically, and use the
       correlations between the two to guide an evolutionary type of mechanism
    3) Allow user input into the evolutionary feedback loop, so as the user
       makes selections, those parameters are increasingly favored.

Most of the code for the initial version of Organism is derived from AUTOMATA.

The Organism class serves as the abstract base class for the hierarchy.  Its
functions include managing the square cell body, managing the family tree, and
iterating through the evolutionary user-feedback loop.

The Organism class has a constructor that accepts zero or one argument.  The
argument is an indicator of how many cells to randomly assign values to.  It
has a default of one, which automatically fills the center cell with a defined
value.

The adjustSize() member function automatically determines if a two-layer
buffer zone exists around the outside edge of the cell body.  If the two-layer
buffer zone does not exist, the cell body is expanded.  If more than two
layers are present, the cell body is contracted.

The evolve() member function performs the actual evolutionary loop.  It works
by calling some of the virtual member functions, which derived classes need to
override when deriving from Organism.  The basic outline for how evolve()
works is this:  a parent organism's evolve() is called.  evolve() constructs a
left and right child from the parent by using the copy constructor to copy the
parent and then introducing a unit mutation (a mutation of a single step at a
single) in the parent's genome via the mutate() virtual function.  The parent
is then displayed at the bottom of the screen, with the children up to the left
and right.

Now, the main evolve() loop is entered.  Each time through, another generation
of the parent and children is calculated and displayed by calling the
nextGen() and plotAt() overridden functions.  While this is happening, a third
child (local newChild) is created and grown.  After newChild->nextGen(), the
fitness() measure of the new child is compared to the fitness() measure of the
right and left child.  If the new child's fitness exceeds either the right or
left child's, then the new child replaces the existing child.

As this is occuring, the user may press 'A', 'L', or <space>.  If the user
presses 'A', the left child's evolve() function is called.  If the user
presses 'L', the right child's evolve() function is called.  If the <space>
bar is pressed, the parents evolve() function returns to whatever called it.
In this way, the tree structure can be traversed by using A or L to move up
the tree and <space> to move back down toward the root.

A mentioned above, four virtual functions are defined for the Organism class.
plotAt() draws the organism at the indicated point.  nextGen() calculates the
next generation for the organism.  mutate() introduces a unit mutation.
Finally, fitness() returns a real value corresponding to the fitness of the
organism, where 0.0 means a completely unfit organism and 1.0 means a
completely fit organism.  All four of these functions are declared pure
virtual, making the Organism class uninstantiable.

The Organism base class defines several member variables.  The leftChild and
rightChild member variables are responsible for maintaining the shape of the
family tree.  The cells pointer points to the array of cells that make up the
cell body.  The size member variable stores that size of one side of the cell
body (which must always be a square).  The prevSize array stores the last ten
sizes over the last ten generations.  Finally, the age member variable stores
the number of generations since the last mutate() function call.

At this point, the Organism class hierarchy is defined so that four derived
classes come from it.  The CAOrg1D class implements a one-dimensional cellular
automaton generator.  The Org2D class is a derived class that serves as the
base class for two other classes.  It provides functions for displaying the
square array of the cell body.  The two classes derived from the Org2D base
class or CAOrg2D, which implements a two-dimensional cellular automaton, and
LifeOrg, which implements John Conway's Game of Life.

CAOrg1D defines a default constructor (no arguments), a copy constructor, and
a virtual destructor.  Then, the four virtual functions are defined.  The
plotAt() member function displays a series of one-dimensional generations as a
two-dimensional square array.  The nextGen() member function calculates the
cell body for the next generation, and updates the temporalEntropy and
spatialEntropy member variables (described below).

The mutate() member function introduces a unit mutation in the automaton's
genome.  The automaton's genome is defined as the rule table.  The unit
mutation means that one particular rule in the rule table is selected and then
either incremented or decremented.  If the rule is incremented and the new
state value is greater than any other state value in the rule table, then the
rule table's length is expanded.

The fitness() member function returns a real value in the range 0.0 to 1.0.
It is calculated by making use of the temporalEntropy and spatialEntropy
values.  According to the definition of these values, the most interesting
rules will produce organisms with a temporalEntropy and spatialEntropy that
tends toward 0.5.  So, to calculate a fitness that approaches 1.0 as the
temporalEntropy and spatialEntropy approaches 0.5 from either side, the
following formula is used:

    fitness = temporalEntropy*(1-temporalEntropy)*4*
        spatialEntropy*(1-spatialEntropy)*4

This is the value returned by the fitness() member function.

There are five member variables for the CAOrg1D class.  The first is called
numOfRules, and defines the number of rules stored in the rule base.  The
second is called rules, and it points to a character array of size numOfRules.

The third member variable for the CAOrg1D class is currentRow.  This variables
is what ties the square array managed by Organism to the linear arrangement of
a one-dimensional cellular automaton.  The currentRow is set to point at the
row that will receive the next generations of cells.  In this way, the square
cell body of Organism can be used as a series of one-dimensional generations.

There are several problems to resolve with doing this, however.  The
adjustSize() member function is a big one.  When the adjustSize() is called,
the function needs to know what the currentRow is in order to properly insert
the two additional rows.  However, currentRow is not available within the
Organism object.  This may be solved by overriding adjustSize() for the
CAOrg1D class.

The last two member variables of CAOrg1D is temporalEntropy and
spatialEntropy.  Both of these are values between 0 and 1, where 0 means no
entropy (difference in cell states) and 1 means maximum entropy.  The
spatialEntropy is measured as the average difference between a cell's value
and its neighbor's value.  The temporalEntropy is measured as the average
difference between a cell's value and its immediate predecessor's value.

The most interesting rules yield cell bodies that have spatial and temporal
entropies that tend toward 0.5.  Actually, the most interesting rules I have
seen seem to have average temporalEntropy values around 0.35.  For now, the
fitness() measure attempts to search out systems with both spatial and
temporal entropy tending towards 0.5.

Three other classes have been declared as derivatives of Organism.  Org2D is a
base class for two-dimensional organisms that provides cell body plotting
functions.  Derived from Org2D is CAOrg2D, a two-dimensional cellular
automaton that uses its rule table as a genome, and LifeOrg, a Game of
Life-type organism that uses variations in the starvation rule, overcrowding
rule, and birth rule as its genome.  The implementation of these classes has
not yet been completed.

06-26-93
I have decided to move the cell body maintenance functions out of Organism.
The Org2D derived class will receive the two-dimensional cell body management
functions already in Organism.  A new class called Org1D has been created that
will handle one-dimensional cell bodies.  Org1D is derived from Organism, and
CAOrg1D is derived from Org1D.  Org1D and Org2D also contain the temporal and
spatial entropy member variables, as well as the fitness() and plotAt()
functions.  These classes also encapsulate the cell body growing functions
that are ensure a buffer is maintained around the cells.

07-06-93
Changed the numOfRules member variable in CAOrg1D to maxState, a member
variable of Org1D.  The value stored now holds the maximum cell value in the
cell body.  This value is used to plot the cell generations.

Having problems with the stack.  May need to do some stack shifting to move
stuff out of the stack and on to the heap.  The problem seems to be occurring
when the free_memory garbage collection function is being called.

I built the class library using the large memory model instead of medium.
This means that the heap allocations will occur on the far heap instead of the
near heap.  This may help the stack problems.

Also, I put checks on the recursive evolve() calls, so that if not enough
stack space remains, the recursive call is not made.

07-12-93
Have designed a new plotAt() member function for Org1D that maps the cell body
on to an ellipse.  The mapping is parabolic from top to bottom, so the bottom
rows are much taller than the top since the bottom rows are the newest
generations.  Have considered making the mapping hyperbolic from left to
right, but haven't done it yet.

Started thinking about expansion of the phenotypic statistics.  At this point,
only temporal and spatial entropy are being selected for.  Here are some
possible inclusions in the phenotypic statistics:

    1) size - select to maximize a size of ~100 cells
    2) delta size - select correlated with size, so that small cell bodies
       with positive delta size are selected and large cell bodies with
       negative delta size are selected.
    3) periodicity - measured as periods of the cell values, or as periods of
       the other statistics? probably easier at first to measure periods of
       the other statistics.  Select for longer periods, against very short
       periods (boring repeaters).
    4) first order cell value frequency table - stores number of cells with
       cell value of 0, number with cell value of 1, etc.  Table of int.
       Number of entries in table is maxState.
    5) spatial second order frequency table - stores frequency of a cell with
       a value of 0 next to a cell with a value of 1, etc.  Table of char.
       Number of entries in table is maxState^2.
    6) temporal second order frequency table - stores frequency of a cell with
       a value of 0 descending from a cell with a value of 1, etc.  Table of
       char.  Number of entries in table is maxState^2.

The last two second-order frequency tables will have complex selection
criteria.  First, the correlation between these frequency tables within a cell
body will need to be measured.  If a definite statistical correlation exists
for these frequency tables, the rules should be selected for.  One thing that
might be noticed is that stable arrangements, both periodic and choatic,
should have cumulative statistics that settle onto definite values.

As these statistics are developed, the correlations between the genotype and
the phenotype can begin to be made.  These correlations should be searched for
in terms of how much a mutation in the genome causes the phenotypic statistics
to change from their values taken over the population of one organism's cells.

With these correlation measurements being taken, a protection mask can be
created.  The protection mask is a value that indicates how likely a mutation
will occur.  For this reason, the size of the protection mask will be the
number of possible mutations over a particular genome.  If it is measured that
one particular mutation causes a large change in the phenotypic statistics,
then that mutation should have more protection.

However, this scheme would seem to favor silent mutations, wasting processor
time pursuing mutations that hardly change the phenotype at all.  The
protection mask should more accurately be stated as this:

    For a mutation m over a genotype Og, the protection mask value p(m) is
    given as:
                              Op - Op~m
                       p(m) = ---------
                               delta m

Thus, the selection procedure should select for mutations that cause neither
large mutations nor silent mutations.

At this point, the user's role in the selection process can begin to be
defined.  The user interacts with the program by pointing at an organism with
the mouse.  The more that the mouse has moved up to the time of the pointing
reflects how much selection the organism gets.  Also, the user may click to
make instantaneous selections.  These will have even higher selection, though
mouse clicks may be used for more specific purposes later.

The user's selections are then correlated with the phenotypic statistics.  Any
place that a particular statistical pattern is found, that statistical pattern
will be selected for.

So, the order of events at this point is:
    1) Finish the elliptical mapping procedure
    2) Implement a mouse cursor for guiding the selection zoom
    3) Implement a mouse-click handling procedure for deciding on
       click-selections
    4) Implement the code to store these selections for each organism
    5) Implement the code to output the statistics and user selections in text
       form
    6) Implement variable children for the Organism class
    9) Implement code to eliminate duplicate children (spawnChild())
    7) Implement variable cell bodies for the Org1D class
    8) Implement a message-network garbage collector
    9) Implement size and delta size statistical measurements
    10) Implement first-order cell value tables
    11) Implement second-order statistics (?)
    12) Implement periodicity measurements
